# Install

Needed to install

* `rocq-mathcomp-ssreflect`
* `rocq-mathcomp-algebra`
* `rocq-mathcomp-algebra-tactics` - had to modify this to work with rocq 9.1.

# Finitely generated subgroups

One issue with f.g. subgroups is that, unlike other groups we encounter in this
work, they do not neccesarily have a finite presentation, even when the parent
group is finitely presented. So we either need a different approach to model them,
or we need to change the definition of presentation to allow for infinite
presentations.

Ideally we would like something computational, but a thing to note is that
the f.g. subgroup membership problem is also undecidable in general, even in
the direct product of two free groups!
(See the famous 
[Mikhailova construction](http://mi.mathnet.ru/eng/sm3978) 
and this
[blog post](https://berstein.wordpress.com/2011/03/07/subgroups-of-the-direct-product-of-two-free-groups/)).
So best we can hope for is some partial computation.

## 1. The AST approach

The idea thats currently implemented is to model a subgroup `H` of a group `G`
generated by a finite set `U` as the projection of an inductive type modeling
the abstract syntax tree of a finitely generated group:

```rocq
Inductive subgroup_ast : Type :=
  | sa_e: subgroup_ast
  | sa_gen (gen: G): genChar gen -> subgroup_ast
  | sa_law: subgroup_ast -> subgroup_ast -> subgroup_ast
  | sa_inv: subgroup_ast -> subgroup_ast.

Fixpoint interpret_subgroup_ast (ast: subgroup_ast): G := match ast with
  | sa_e => e
  | sa_gen gen _ => gen
  | sa_law ast1 ast2 => (interpret_subgroup_ast ast1) @ (interpret_subgroup_ast ast2)
  | sa_inv ast => inv (interpret_subgroup_ast ast)
  end.
```

We then define the subgroup as the collection of all elements that are equal
to some projection:

```rocq
Definition in_generated_subgroup (x: G): Type :=
  { ast | x == interpret_subgroup_ast ast }.
```

This is in some sense the most general possible definition, but it would require
us to prove quite some background theory e.g. to show that every element of 
the subgroup can always be written as the left-to-right product

$$
  u_1^{\varepsilon_1} \cdot (
    u_2^{\varepsilon_2} \cdot (
      \cdots (
        u_{n-1}^{\varepsilon_{n-1}} \cdot u_n^{\varepsilon_n}) \cdots))$$

where $n\in \mathbb{N}_0$, $u_1, \ldots, u_n\in U$,
$\varepsilon_1, \ldots, \varepsilon_n \in \{-1, 1\}$ and we interpret the empty
product as the identity. This would require us to prove a normalization lemma
on the abstract syntax trees etc.

It may also make it hard to work with concrete finitely generated subgroups.

## 2. The Set approach

We could just take the above product property and define the set directly as
the set of all left-to-right products with inversion, e.g. something like
(note some notation is my imagination)

```rocq
Definition subgroup (U: subset G): Set :=
  { x | exists (l: list (U + inv U)), map l mul e == x }
```

the advantage here is that we could apply some computation that we inherit
from lists. However, it gets much more difficult to show that this is actually
a group. E.g. we need to prove a lot of lemmas with regards to cancellation and
products. Things that we already prove for free groups.

## 3. The free group projection approach

Motivated by the above approach we might think to instead use free groups.
Indeed, by the universal property of free groups, if we have a set
$A$ and a function $\iota: A \rightarrow G$ then this extends uniquely to a
homomorphism $\varphi: FG(A) \rightarrow G$ such that $\iota$ and $\varphi$
agree on $A$. Proving this is not too hard, we do something very similar
for the free monoid in the `MonoidPresentation` library, see the
[`UniversalProperty` section of `monoids.v`](https://github.com/hivert/MonoidPresentation/blob/cpp2026_open/theories/monoids.v#L110).

So, given that have some sort of function taking $\iota$ into the morphism
$\varphi$, e.g.

```rocq
Definition univmor (iota: A -> G): {freegroup A} -> G.
```

we could define the subgroup as the set

```rocq
Definition subgroup (U: subset G): Set :=
  { x | exists (y: {freegroup U}), univmor (fun (u: U) => u) y == x }
```

now we inherit a lot of computation from the free group, especially with
respect to the free cancellation which we dont get from the lists.

However, a problem that we've yet to address is the fact that the subgroup
as defined above does not have uniqueness of members, i.e. the same element
`x` could occur in `subgroup U` via two different free-group elements
`y` and `z`. This complicates defining a group structure and morphisms,
since we now have the implicit equality `(x1, y1) == (x2, y2) <-> x1 == x2`.

## 4. Free group projection + setoid groups

To address the shortcomings of the set-based definitions, we could
change how we define a group, essentially replacing the underlying
set with a setoid (it might be tempting to call this a
[groupoid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Groupoid),
but I believe this is wrong, since we require a total multiplication)
e.g. 

```rocq
HB.mixin Record IsSetoidGroup G := {
  equiv : G -> G -> Prop; (* Somehow constrain equiv to be an equivalence relation *)
  e     : G;
  mul   : G -> G -> G;
  inv   : G -> G;
  mulA  : forall x y z, equiv (mul x (mul y z))  (mul (mul x y) z);
  mul1r : forall x, equiv (mul x e) x;
  mul1l : forall x, equiv (mul e x) x;
  mulIr : forall x, equiv (mul x (inv x)) e;
  mulIl : forall x, equiv (mul (inv x) x) e;
}.
```

so that we replace Rocq equality `=` with the equivalence relation
`equiv`. The advantage of this is that, when `equiv` is decidable
(e.g. free group, terminating rewriting system) we can just prove a
reflection lemma and be done with it.

For f.p. groups we already have something like this via the inductive
`Derivation: G -> G -> Prop` defined in `Presentation.v`.

The rest of the proposal follows as in the free group projection case, but
we make the sugroup a group by defining the equivalence `equiv` on `subgroup U`
via `fun (x1, y1) (x2, y1) => equiv x1 x2`.

To prove that a map `phi: subgroup U1 -> subgroup U2` is a homomorphism,
we need to establish that

```
  forall x y,
  equiv (phi e) e /\
  equiv (phi (mul x y)) (mul (phi x) (phi y)) /\
  equiv (phi (inv x)) (inv (phi x))
```

When the source group is finitely presented, by $\langle A | R \rangle$
we can prove that this is equivalent to 

```
  forall u v, [:: u, v] in R -> equiv (phi u) (phi v)
```

this is sometimes called Dycks theorem. In particular for the free group we
get the universal morphism property instantly since the only relations are
$a a^{-1} = 1$, which follow immediately from the axioms.

Hence, to prove that the subgroups $\langle a_p, b^q \rangle$ and
$\langle a_{p^\prime}, b^{q^\prime} \rangle$ are isomorphic, we would need to

1. Show that each subgroup is free
   (TODO: write this up, its written down in Lyndon & Schupp Section 1.2 and is
   very simple for our particular case)
   this neccesarily shows that the defining homomorphisms from the free groups
   are injective and give us an isomorphism to the defining free group
   immediately.
2. Prove any two free groups whose alphabets have the same size are isomorphic.
   This is immediate from the universal property.
3. Show isomorphism is transitive.

I think this might be the right approach.


